okay so hopefully you can see my title
slide here Hawking's black hole and the
edge of physics Stephen Hawking born in
1942 his photograph of him here he went
off to some other University to do his
undergraduate studies before coming to
his senses and coming to Cambridge for
his PhD and that was 62 to 64 and then
in 1979 he was elected Lucasian
Professor of mathematics which is the
post that Newton held when he was here
so extraordinarily prestigious position
for a man of relatively young age and by
sheer coincidence 1979 was the year that
I came up to Cambridge's and
undergraduates and I nearly ran Stephen
Hawking over in my motorcar when I was
driving up Trumpington Street he came
careering out of the department of maths
that used to be down Mill Lane there on
his chariot in the dark with no lights
on so nearly ended one or possibly two
distinguished careers now the thing that
made Stephen very famous indeed to the
general public as opposed to just the
scientific community with this book a
brief history of time and you got the
list of the chapters there now we don't
have time to play through all of those
this was an absolute bestseller ten
million copies sold but they say about
it it's the only bestseller that's
probably never been read all the way
through or at least not by the majority
of its owners and it's certainly one or
two sticky places in the book where it
loses people and I'm gonna hopefully try
and tell you enough to get you past some
of those but I do recommend going and
having a read of it again if you've
still got a copy that's on the Shelf
somewhere
has also made famous by this movie that
was just a few years ago now the theory
of everything where Eddie Redmayne
played Stephen and did an extraordinary
job of representing Stephen it's almost
could have been him but there's a
problem because the title the theory of
everything is what the media loved to
say about Stephen is that he was trying
to produce this theory of everything or
even that he did produce it but of
course he didn't and it wasn't and it
might though have been the first step
beyond Einstein on the road towards a
theory of everything and the rest of us
are still groping towards that snail so
to understand it we have to go back to
the basics and thought that wolves
thought manna underneath an apple tree
with the universal law of gravitation
you all know this story Isaac Newton
sat's
contemplating the universe sees an apple
fall and realizes that the force that
made the Apple move is the same force
that keeps the planets in their orbits
and the moon orbiting around to the
earth and most schoolchildren would
understand a bit about gravity would
understand if you jump gravity pulls you
back down but if you ask what would
happen if the earth was twice as massive
the answer might not be quite what you'd
expect and I leave the answer to that
for you to muse upon I'm also goodness
there's a more difficult question
what's if the earth was squeezed to half
its size if we kept the mass the same
but squeezed the earth into half the
volume what would that do to the height
that you could jump on the surface and
really it all relates to the topic of
escape velocity with
enough cannon you can fire a shell into
space you need to send the Cannonball up
at 17,500 miles an hour or more
if you 25,000 miles an hour it'll
never come back and that's illustrated
in this diagram we've built our giant
cannon here at the North Pole we fire it
when it lands in the ocean we fire it a
bit further it disappears over the
horizon and lens wrote rather rudely in
somebody else's ocean but if we fired it
at 17,500 miles an hour it would come
right round the earth and hit us in the
back of the head and the reason is that
it's falling towards the center of the
earth all the time but the direction to
the center of the earth keeps changing
because you keep having to account for
the fact you're moving in a curve they
always points towards the center the
force of gravity is continually changing
so it accelerates you round in a circle
and you end up getting back to where you
started if you happen to go faster
25,000 miles an hour then you have
escape velocity and you have enough
energy when fired out of the cannon that
you will defeat gravity and escape
forever here's a picture of Stephen and
the media would say Stephen Hawking in
zero gravity here of course that's wrong
he's not in zero gravity
he's flying in an aeroplane through the
Earth's atmosphere it just so happens
that the plane is following a trajectory
designed to match the path of a
free-falling object so that the plane
and the contents and the occupants are
all free-falling and there's no net
acceleration caused by gravity between
the two of them and so it simulates the
effect that gravity has gone away but of
course it hasn't and gravity never goes
away and gravity never goes to zero on
the International Space Station
are all myths that we have to put behind
us in trying to understand these things
the gravity is always there the question
is are you falling under gravity at the
same rate unimpeded by anything else and
if so then you won't be able to tell
that there is any gravity at all that's
very fundamental another fundamental
thing is this kind of light we've talked
a lot about this in the earlier talk
where we're talking about how we measure
distances in terms of light-years and we
even mentioned the idea that maybe the
speed of light is not I'll start that
again that the speed of light is
fundamental and that time and distance
are relative to it you know in the some
of the ideas of Einstein when the first
person to try to measure the speed of
light was Galileo he's always the first
person in my talks and he decided to do
an experiment he sent his long-suffering
assistant to a distant hilltop umm and
climbed the nearby one himself both
armed with a lamp and a cloth and the
idea was that Galileo would uncover his
lamp and when his assistant saw the
light
his assistant would uncover his lamp
when Galileo saw the assistance lamp
light up he would cover his back up
again and likewise the assistant when he
saw Galileo's lamp go out would cover
his back up again and so it would go on
round and round and this would result in
the them having to cover and uncover
their lamps at a rate determined by the
round-trip time of the speed of light
now of course the experiment was pretty
much unsuccessful in that the speed of
light is so fast that the human reaction
time and the movement of covering are
uncovering the lamps with a dominant
factor in the experiment and so Galileo
wrong and giving up he actually
concluded that light was at least ten
times faster than sound so he did put a
lower bound on how fast it must be
because you could do this same
experiment by making loud noises and
hearing them arrive considerably later
because of the relatively slow speed of
sound
so I was in 1638 and just 40 years later
oleh Roma realized he could do Galileo's
experiment on a interplanetary scale
meaning enlisted the moons of Jupiter
and Jupiter itself to take the place of
Galileo's assistant while he himself
stayed on the earth and in the diagram
on the right here we've got the Sun in
the middle and the Earth's orbit around
it and then up where it says B that's
Jupiter and the ring around it is the
orbit of Jupiter's moon Io which takes
just a day and a half to go around
Jupiter once and you can also see
Jupiter's casting a shadow so the idea
is that IO will go round and be eclipsed
and disappear into Jupiter's shadow at
Point C and then reappear again later at
Point D when it comes back out and if
you observe this as you're sitting on
the earth at one of the other lettered
points that are marked there G or F
perhaps you can time exactly according
to your clock when that happens and
compare the timings that you get when
you're at G with the timings that you
get when you're at F and what you'll
find is that the timings at F seem to
suggest that the eclipse occurs later
than it does at G and as the earth moves
around its orbit you'll see a pattern of
the eclipses getting earlier as you
approach them and later as you move
further away and from that you can work
out how long the light is taking to
cross the distance between G and F from
the difference in the observed times of
the eclipses so that's what he did and
he came out with a really rather good
figure 220 thousand kilometres per
second we now measure it in the lab at
299 792 so he was close is the right
order of magnitude at least
and give him the way he was trying to do
it I think that worked rather well
so armed with now the an idea that light
does not move infinitely fast as a
finite speed and a known speed at that
the story now goes on and we get to John
Michell he was a clergyman astronomer
there were a lot of these around in the
17 and 1800's and he used their idea of
the speed of light and Newton's
equations that were now widely known
they were published in the 1680s in the
Principia and he took them and worked
out but given the ideas of escape
velocity if you plugged in the speed of
light into the escape velocity formula
you could calculate how massive an
object would need to be and he worked
out that a star 500 times larger than
the Sun would have an escape velocity
greater than the speed of light and
that's absolutely right it would do he
turned this idea that dark star
hypothesis because he reasoned that such
a star you wouldn't be able to see it
shining the light would not be able to
escape from it and he was quite worried
that the universe might be hiding a lot
of these unseen monstrous objects
because by then we were beginning to get
some idea about the mass range of stars
out there in the universe from the
little tiddlers the red dwarfs that are
only a tenth the mass of our Sun up to
the biggest ones that we were observing
which were maybe a hundred or so times
the mass of the Sun maybe 200 maybe 300
in extreme cases but certainly none
larger than that
and Mitchell argued that perhaps this
was because they were there but
invisible because of this Dark Star
problem
we of course now would call such an
object not a dark star but a black hole
and the next hero of the story we get
1915 and Karl Schwarzschild and I'm
skipping Einstein because he's the real
hero of the piece but Schwarzschild used
Einstein's general relativity Einstein's
explanation of gravity being caused by
the curvature of space and worked out
the same sort of calculation that
Mitchell had done he worked out if you
put enough mass into a small space then
you would get gravity so strong that the
escape velocity would exceed the speed
of light and he came out with his
formula there safar child's radius which
is very simple it says that the radius
of a black hole is 2 times G the
strength of gravity from Newton's ideas
times the mass of the object divided by
the square of the speed of light that
square of the speed of light turns up
all over everything and this spike child
radius he says marks our boundary in
space-time it's called the event horizon
and thing no matter no light on no
information can cross from inside to
outside things can fall in but they can
never come out and you can first see
what's happening on the inside if you
crossed inwards you might find out
what's happening inside but you can't
come back out and tell anybody but I
wouldn't recommend it often ask what
would happen if you fell into a black
hole well as you go in the strength of
gravity increases as you get closer
that's the standard law of Newton
that's the closer you are the stronger
the pull of gravity but it means that
the pull of gravity on this astronauts
eat that a nearer the object is stronger
than the pull of gravity on his head and
the difference can become so great that
it would exceed the strength of your
bones and tear you apart in a process
that we technically called
spaghettification
in fact this occurs not just with black
holes but with comets that approach
giant planets they get spaghettified and
indeed that's probably the origin of the
rings of Saturn that some large object
came too close to it and this tidal
effect of the gravity on one edge of the
object being stronger than the other
tore it apart but this definitely
happens if you try to fall into a black
hole you wouldn't stand a chance
but the really weird stuff now starts to
kick in because we have to start
thinking about what you you would
observe if you were falling in and what
I would observe if I stayed at a safe
distance and watched you and the first
thing to note is that trying to get out
of a black hole or indeed away from any
heavy object you're trying to climb out
of a gravity well it costs energy as you
move up and out of a gravity well away
from an object and indeed even light
suffers from this so that as the light
quite is climbing away from the black
hole it loses energy and it gets shifted
to redder and redder wavelengths the
more intensely gravity field is and so
as you started to fall in towards the
black hole I would gradually staying
outside I would see you get redder and
redder and redder and indeed fainter and
fainter because the light would be less
energetic all of the time as you went
further and further deeper into the
gravity field
time is also affected by all of this its
gravity is a curvature not only of space
but of the structure of space-time and
so when I watch you falling in if you
happen to be carrying a suitably large
clock that I could read it then I would
see that clock ticking more and more
slowly
essentially the ticks of the clock and
the oscillations of the light beam and
everything are being slowed down so the
light seems to have a longer wavelength
for lower frequency and is therefore
shifted to the red and the clock seems
to tick more slowly but from your point
of view you wouldn't notice any of that
you would just fall straight in but from
outside I would never see you actually
cross the event horizon you would appear
to go slower and slower and be redder
and fainter as you approach that limit
that event horizon and at the event
horizon the effect of the slowdown
becomes infinite so the clock as viewed
from outside stops ticking and I would
have to wait the entire age of the
universe for the next tick into the
future an infinitely long time into the
future for the next photon to arrive out
from there and it would be a very faint
very red photon carrying away the very
last bit of energy to escape sounds
particularly weird so perhaps we should
first just have a sanity check and see
if such things are real physical parts
of our universe oh ah black holes real
well we believe that they're created
supernovae when a very large star sent
more than ten times the mass of the Sun
explodes as a supernova the central core
gets crushed down and it can make a
super dense ball of matter
right in the center the typical outcome
is it produces a thing called a neutron
star a ball of neutrons rather like a
giant atomic nucleus where all the
electrons and the protons have been
rammed together to form neutrons and the
density is just obscene it's a billion
billion kilograms per cubic meter so a
sugar cube would weigh a trillion tons
and we do see such things out there in
the universe these collapsed stars and
in particular they Crab Nebula that I
showed you the photograph of just now
contains what's called the crab pulsar
which is a rotating neutron star that's
giving off radio waves and here's a
picture of it and the sound you're
hearing is the pulses of radio waves
that are emanating from it sweeping
across the earth as the thing spins
around it flashes like a lighthouse you
can see that in the animation and see
the swirling and you can see that
flashing bright spots there which is
sending a beam of radio and energy and
visible light and x-rays and everything
else our way and it's what's being
picked up by the radio telescope and
turned into these clicks for you above
about three solar masses of core so four
stars that are perhaps 15 solar masses
originally they're not able to fall
neutron stars the force that stops the
neutrons being crushed together anymore
as called neutron degeneracy pressure is
overwhelmed by gravity and no known
force can present prevent the collapse
continuing and matter is crushed right
down and forms of singularity we think
maybe some of our theories don't work
very well at singularities but it forms
a black hole
with an event horizon and whatever is
going on inside is and we think that
we've detected that is a
cygnus x-1 where there is a blue
supergiant star orbiting a black hole
and in 1975 Stephen Hawking and Kip
Thorne another black hole scientist had
a bet about this which Hawking
eventually was forced to concede on to
sign off that Cygnus x1 was evidence of
a black hole now you might be surprised
that Stephen was betting against the
existence of black holes but he said it
was an insurance policy
now this object was discovered in 1964
as an x-ray source and it gives off the
x-rays from a very compact region
there's only 300 kilometers across and
contains 14 point 8 solar masses we know
that because the two are orbiting around
each other and wherever you have two
orbiting objects you can use Kepler's
laws and Newton's gravitational formula
to get at the masses of them from their
orbits it's fairly straightforward and
such an object with nearly 15 solar
masses compressed into such a small
space complies with SWAT child's formula
and can only be a black hole
we also find them in the middle of
galaxies this was talked about by Clive
last week and we think there's a black
hole at the center of our galaxy right
in the middle there you zoom right in
you find our bright cluster of hot stars
and a lot of hot gas right in the middle
mark Sagittarius a star there but we can
zoom in further even and then zoom in a
fourth time and see what looks like the
disc of hot gas orbiting around where
the very center of our galaxy contains
this black hole I think the best
evidence is this animation where we have
stars orbiting around the black hole and
again from the orbits we're able to work
out the mass I had my students do this
just the other day and from the orbit of
the stars and the period you can work
out that there's four million solar
masses at point x the Red Cross there
where there is no visible object and
really the only way for that to happen
is for it to be a black hole holes are
very messy eaters they give off these
amazing radio and matter Jets coming
away from their north and south magnetic
poles because they're spinning they
generate enormous magnetic fields and
the accretion disk shown there of matter
is sweeping around in a spiral trying to
fall into the black hole but some of the
charged particles because this disk is
at nearly a million degrees it gets so
hot through friction all the atoms are
ripped apart and the individual charged
particles in a magnetic field get
deflected and twisted and shot up along
the beams along the magnetic axes and
propelled outwards at nearly the speed
of light but I just going to say all of
this beam is coming from outside the
black hole it's it's the matter falling
in that fails to make
get and gets deflected and shot out
again at right angles before it's
crossed into the black hole
now we see evidence for this having
happened in our own galaxy because see
the Fermi bubbles these regions of
superhot gas that are giving off gamma
rays and x-rays above and below the
Galactic plane of the Milky Way here
which is laid out horizontally for you
and it's where the spinning black hole
at the center of our galaxy was having
lunch about 6 million years ago eating a
tremendous amount of material and
throwing a lot of it back out along it's
slightly misaligned but rotating axis of
magnetic spin so it created like two
cones of material shooting outwards and
they've turned into these enormous
bubbles the Fermi bubbles we also have
evidence that these strange objects that
were discovered in the 1950s that are
very very bright very distant but
nevertheless tiny point-like objects
called quasars quasi-stellar objects and
they were discovered and with radio
telescopes and then finally identified
optically and david she burst I think at
the done London Bell at the Institute of
astronomy and that's it who correctly
pointed out that these are the active
feeding black holes of distant galaxies
in the ancient universe so when the
galaxies were in their growth phase they
were feeding voraciously and the black
holes in the center were growing
voraciously in tandem and feeding on the
material of their nascent galaxies and
it creates these immensely powerful
light shows that we see and the one
shown here is 9 billion light years away
ok and the light has traveled for
two-thirds of the age of the universe to
get to us so we universe was only
one-third its age and actually we don't
see quasars like this in the nearby
universe because it
sir a thing of the past the active
feeding phrase of the galaxies has
pretty much come to an end except for
the occasional burst that happens like
in our Milky Way six million years ago
and so there aren't really any current
quasars so we have to look a long way
back in time to see them and that's
where you really start to realize you
have to start thinking about when there
you are looking as well as where you are
looking and the further away you're
looking the further back in time the
events where you're looking at happens
and they can be quite different in the
past to the way they are now so is a the
supermassive black holes feeding in the
center of galaxies the other way we've
detected black holes is by the merger of
pairs of them sometimes you get a pair
of them orbiting around each other under
gravity and they tend to spiral inwards
they lose energy by emitting gravity
waves the disturbance of space and time
caused by the immense gravity of these
objects is enough to create these
significant amount of gravity waves that
carries energy away from the system and
so they gradually lose energy and spiral
in and eventually they'll merge together
this is just a simulation yes of two
black holes not a real image I must say
and it's simulating also the effect of
the distortion on the background stars
of the gravity of these two objects and
once they merge together that distortion
pretty much comes to an end and things
settle down
it's just repeating and we've detected
this if used the LIGO the laser
interferometer gravity wave observatory
actually there are two of them one in
Louisiana in the south of the US and the
other one in the northwest at Hanford in
Washington State and the idea is that
you have these Observatory building in
the middle there and the two long white
tunnels are evacuated light beam tunnels
with a mirror at the far end and they
send a laser beam split it in half
send half down each axis and wait for
the beam to come back and then recombine
it and see if they re arrival time from
the two arms varies at all and it's an
incredibly precise measurement in fact
they send the beam up and down the arm
72 times each before making the
measurement to give themselves a very
long light path and we have two of these
because you need to be able to prove
that what you observed wasn't just a
passing train or a micro earthquake and
so observations only really count if
they're observed by both these detectors
3,000 miles apart and that indeed is
what they manage to do and here is the
for the data from Hanford at the top in
orange Livingstone in blue and the two
overlaid I think you would agree that's
a very good fit and we can turn that
wave that you see there into sound so if
you listen a moment you might hear it
there it weighs will repeat it it starts
off very low pitched and gets higher
there it is so you feel of a low hum and
then it gets up to a higher and higher
pitch and until they merge together
there we go so that's the sound of a 20
solar mass black hole merging with a 30
solar mass black hole to create a 45
solar mass black hole and if you think
my maths is off it's because equals MC
squared and five solar masses of
material was converted into energy and
carried away by the gravity wave
to make that sound which we're now
detecting many billions of years later
from halfway across the universe and if
you still don't believe in finally
photographed one and this is the galaxy
on the Left Messier 87 a giant
elliptical galaxy and you can just see
the jet of material that's emerging from
it because the black hole in the center
is feeding at the moment and shooting
jets out in the process but their image
on the right is the accretion disk and
the black hole in the middle is black
and that is the highest resolution
photograph that mankind has ever
produced it was produced by a
combination of telescopes all over the
world everywhere from Russia Europe
America and all the way down to
including the South Pole combining their
data together and eventually after much
computer processing turning it into an
image but it's a radio telescope image
but it's an image nevertheless and I say
it's got the finest angular resolution
of any photograph ever produced so
hopefully I've convinced you that black
holes are real so let's get back to
talking about Stephen and Stephens
masterpiece what was it that really made
him famous among scientists and got him
the job of Lucasian Professor in 1974
that this trail starts he realized that
black holes appeared to violate the laws
of hate and thermodynamics particularly
the ones about heat always flowing from
a hot body to a cold body then you try
that with black holes and something
seemed to be wrong
essentially it boiled down to what is
the temperature of a black hole if
nothing ever comes out of it and Stephen
eventually put a paper together which
shocked the scientific world because it
combined some mechanics the theory of
how atoms and particles behave in the
very small arena and general relativity
from Einstein the theory of gravity in
the very large astronomical arena and
thermodynamics all in one paper and he
made them play nicely with each other
that's what normally happens if you try
to combine any of any two out of three
of these is that your sums blow up in
your face with an infinity or worse an
infinite number of infinities
and Stephen at the end of this produced
a prediction which he himself came up
with the term for Echolls ain't so black
and then it's the title of chapter 7 of
his book so we've covered in Whistlestop
time the ideas of a picture of our
universe a little bit about space and
time we've talked about the expanding
universe and we've talked about black
holes chapter 6 but we skipped over
chapter four and five here and we're
gonna have to go back because in order
to understand Stephens theory we need to
understand what's going on in Chapter
four here the uncertainty principle this
is the quantum mechanical part and
there's a picture of Verna Heisenberg
who came up with this theorem that
showed that in a quantum system you can
never know everything you cannot know
all the information about a system more
specifically there are pairs of things
the more you know about one the less you
can inherently know about the other and
it's not just about how good your
equipment is or whether you can measure
it precisely it's actually a fundamental
limit on the amount of information
you're allowed to have by the laws of
the universe and little equation for you
it's very simple Delta X is how well you
know the position it's the uncertainty
in the x coordinate the position of your
particle and Delta P that's the
uncertainty in its momentum in other
words in its speed of movement times its
mass so you could put Delta X and then
you could put Delta V at times M in
there if you wanted to and what this
says is that the product of those two
quantities is always bigger than some
constant H divided by 4pi and h is
planck's
constants which is the fundamental
constant of all of quantum mechanics and
is a very very small number it's so
small that we don't notice quantum
effects most of the time in our daily
lives but nevertheless this means that
for a particle like an electron whizzing
around the better you pinned down its
position the less you can inherently
know about its speed so as soon as
you've tracked it down it whizzes off at
some indeterminate speed is somewhere
else
an instant later and you don't know
where so your ability to track hits it
pin it down to one particular spot is
extremely short-lived indeed in fact
there's another way of formulating this
same equation a little bit of
manipulation you can turn it into the
second equation here which says Delta e
the energy multiplied by delta T how
long you know that energy for is also
always greater than the same value of
Planck's constant over 4pi and what this
means from the point of view of our
story is that for short periods of time
the energy of a system can be very
uncertain it allows you to violate the
conservation of energy now we mentioned
this earlier that general relativity
lets you violate the conservation of
energy because your universe is allowed
to expand turns out that quantum
mechanics does as well so they
definitely lied to you at school but
there is a caveat you can only violate
the conservation of energy provided you
do it so quickly that you don't get
caught what you have to do is pay the
energy back quickly enough that the
great cosmic accountant doesn't notice
and doesn't charge you interest on your
overdraft
it's like borrowing money from the bank
and paying it back the same day ok
weather
consequence of it is that empty space
can never have precisely zero energy if
you manage to make a piece of space in a
box and he pulled all the air out of it
and he made her the best vacuum you
possibly could and you made a better one
than than that even and got all the
particles out of it
then they would not be zero energy left
in there because if there was well zero
energy has zero uncertainty about it and
therefore you would violate this
equation
essentially it says that can never
happen
now to put all of this together we to
think a moment about matter and
antimatter and energy everything we see
around us you me the air that we are
breathing is made of ordinary matter
where you have atoms with a positive
nucleus made of protons and neutrons and
negatively charged electrons whizzing
round the outside but there is another
type of matter called antimatter where
the particles that live in the nuclei
are anti protons with a negative charge
and anti electrons can be made that whiz
around them we've made this stuff in the
lab it's the most expensive material
ever produced at about a trillion
dollars per microgram so vastly more
expensive than gold now the thing with
antimatter is that if it gets together
with ordinary matter the two cancel each
other out and release all of their
energy via equals MC squared
the M the mass of both is destroyed and
turned into pure energy but we can do
that the other way around in particle
accelerators all the time we take energy
and smash things together and create
complementary pairs of particles and
antiparticles indeed this happens in
cosmic rays in the upper atmosphere as
well so what's really going on and the
reason that empty space has not got zero
energy is because all the time in empty
space particle pairs pairs of particles
and antiparticles are popping into
existence what they do is they borrow
some energy from space-time
we ate themselves out of this apparent
nothingness
was about for a very short period of
time and then annihilate again with each
other
paying back the debt within that time
limit sent set by the uncertainty
principle and so empty space seeds
continuously with these ethereal virtual
particle pairs and if this sounds crazy
which I'm sure it does you'll be
surprised that we've did it because
there is a experiment devised by Hendrik
Casimir he predicted the Casimir effect
for in theory what it says is that you
hold two metal plates in a vacuum
chamber together then the vacuum outside
the plates has more possible energy
states than the constrained space
between the two and the result is that
you can't create as met as many
different varieties of particles in
between the plates as you can outside
and so the plates are pushed together
and you can do this experiment in the
lab and measure a force of about one
atmosphere pressure on the plates so
it's a real physical effect but it's
much larger than you might have expected
I mean one atmosphere is quite a lot so
now know all the pieces what Stephen did
was
them together figured that near the edge
of a black hole a strange thing can
happen if you have a black hole shown in
the gray disc here with its dotted red
line around it as the event horizon then
some distance away up to the left there
we've got a particle antiparticle pair
that pop into existence wave at us and
then annihilate and disappear they
recombine they pay the energy back to
the great cosmic accountants Verna
Heisenberg is perfectly happy all good
but if that happens right next to the
event horizon of a black hole then a
problem can occur the blue particle here
has fallen into the black hole and it
can't get out and so it can't annul a
with its partner that's a bit of a
problem because we've got to pay the
accountant back somehow
but what Steven showed was that actually
as the blue particle falls inwards down
the gravity hill of the black hole
energy is released from gravity and that
energy gets used to repay the energy
debt to the universe and that allows the
escaping red particle to become a real
physical particle and so the event
horizon of black holes tears the space
apart like this and tears the particles
that are in it apart and creates a
stream of particles that seem to come
from the black hole outwards that seemed
to come they don't come from inside it
they are coming from just outside it
you can't see the particles that are
falling in you but you can see the ones
that escaped from near the edge and this
stream of particles appears as
high-energy radiation and we call it
Hawking radiation named after Stephen
now Stephen went further he was able to
calculate exactly how much of this there
should be how much radiation should be
coming from just outside the event
horizon and that escaping radiation
means that black holes have a
temperature and that solved his
thermodynamic problem of what is the
temperature of a black hole now he went
further because there is a immediate
realization and that is that energy
create all of this Hawking radiation has
come from the black hole itself so the
black hole slowly loses energy and
therefore loses mass energy and mass are
the same thing equals MC squared
so eventually holes evaporate completely
they will emit Hawking radiation from
around their event horizon at a cost to
themselves of space-time energy which
means that they lose mass and so
eventually they'll disappear completely
now you might imagine that a big black
hole with strong gravity would create a
lot of Hawking radiation and a little
black hole would be much less but it
turns out it's the other way around
large black holes have a relatively
gentle slope at the event horizon there
at the right of this graph where things
are changing on a fairly gentle slope
and so a particle created on that slope
doesn't have to move a sari has to move
a very long way along the slope to the
left and climb up is to gain enough
height to pay back the cosmic
accountants the bill for the creation of
its partner as it climbs that energy
hill that's the release of energy as
it's falling in it's actually upside
down this graph and the result is that a
large black hole the particle has to
move a long way in space
in order to release enough energy and
that takes a long time but you've got to
remember you haven't got a long time
because you've got to pay the bill back
quickly within that Heisenberg limit and
so this is a rather rare process the
particles have to be moving very fast
and not all particles make it in time
and so they end up annihilating again
so large black holes have a low Hawking
temperature they don't put out much
radiation at all tiny ones however the
slope is very steep so you get a lot of
energy very quickly without moving very
fast and so they are much more able to
produce Hawking radiation so they have a
high Hawking temperature let's have a
look at a couple of examples of the
hawking temperature of real black holes
if we had a black hole the mass of our
Sun you could work out that the Hawking
temperature of it would be naught point
naught naught naught one so one ten
millionth of a degree
that's very very low temperature indeed
tiny fraction above absolute zero and so
really a solar mass black hole is
probably not going to be detectable as
regards putting it out any Hawking
radiation furthermore that temperature
is lower than the cosmic microwave
background radiation from the echo of
the Big Bang that Jonathan talked about
at 2.7 to 5 degrees Kelvin and so
actually there will be 2 million no 20
million times more energy from
microwaves falling into the black hole
then there will be from the Hawking
radiation coming away from it and so the
black hole will in fact grow larger
because it will be feeding on the energy
of the microwaves much faster than it's
bleeding energy as a result of Hawking
radiation
so suck black holes the size of the Sun
would never ever evaporate what about Oh
a couple me would say let's make the
moon into a black hole if we turn the
moon into a black hole
we'd have to crush it down somehow to an
object
10 micrometers across and if we did that
the Hawking temperature of this
microscopic black hole would actually be
2 point 7 degrees Kelvin so it would be
roughly in balance with the microwave
background radiation and such a black
hole would persist forever neither
really shrinking nor growing I'll come
back to that on the other hand an easier
experiment for you to try at home turn
Mount Everest into a black hole it's
much less massive object you would
create a microscopic black hole that
would have a very high Hawking
temperature and in fact it would
evaporate really quite quickly I say
quite quickly to start with it would be
a fairly slow process and primordial
black holes of this sort of mass the
mass of a mountain might have been
created during that early stage of the
Big Bang and if they were then we would
be able to see their last death throes
as they approached the final evaporation
because as they get smaller they get
less massive the event horizon shrinks
so the gravity is steeper so the Hawking
radiation gets hotter so they shrink
even faster and it's a runaway process
and they would evaporate and the
temperature would rise exponentially and
just for that last few seconds would
have the power output of 10,000 stars
and they would probably look a little
bit like a supernova explosion and if
they were created back at the time of
the Big Bang then if we looked far
enough back
time we would perhaps have been looking
at maybe 10 or 12 billion years back in
time at that sort of distance away from
us then we might see some of these
explosions and the search continues
because we haven't spotted any yet which
might mean this is all wrong
or it might mean that such primordial
black holes didn't actually get created
and we we don't know the experiment
continues now you might also remember
that when the Large Hadron Collider was
being built people were making a fuss
about whether or not it was going to
make a black hole and if it did the
black hole might swallow the whole earth
and this would clearly be bad
well according to Hawking microscopic
black holes such as might be created by
the LHC would be so small and so
lightweight that they're Hawking
temperature would be very high and they
would evaporate so quickly that they
wouldn't even be able to reach the edge
of the container and so we assumed that
we were safe and they switched it on and
we're still here so I guess Stephen was
right actually we also knew that cosmic
rays would have created this effect
already and so we wouldn't be here to
ask the question if this was happening
in the upper atmosphere and it was
raining black holes that would
definitely have ended our existence some
time ago right though I've already said
a couple of times that I'm Stein showed
that gravity bends space and bends time
and if you don't believe me well I
usually say that in order to get to this
lecture you probably used sat-nav
somewhere along the way but of course
we're doing this by zoom so it doesn't
apply but if you had been using your
sat-nav it absolutely depends for
getting its accuracy on taking account
of the bent space around the earth and
the bent time that goes with it
and if we didn't then it would be a
kilometer out and wouldn't be much use
as a navigational tool so we're really
very sure that these things that I've
been saying are correct but if we now
have a little bit look of a look beyond
the Hawking radiation and off into some
of the more fanciful ideas in the later
parts of Stephens book let's just have a
look at the black hole might look like
if you tried to draw the gravity of it
it looks like a funnel going into a
infinitely deep bottomless pit of
gravity but what we could do
lichterman black hole and chop the
bottom off together with a second
one like this and we've created a
wormhole
you've always certainly heard of
wormholes they're the two mouths of a
pair of black holes linked and joined
together so that rather than a
bottomless pit you have a tunnel through
which you could possibly travel
might be very useful of a tunnel through
space because it would save us having to
do all of that
tedious long-range commuting up around
the universe instead of travelling from
Earth to some distant star by following
the red arrow path on this folded
diagram you could just nip through a
handy wormhole create a shortcut across
the universe and get there much more
quickly than that tedious traveling at
the speed of light would allow you could
therefore get there in a very short
period of time indeed now the theory
says that such things could exist as the
maths of what's called an einstein-rosen
bridge shown there I'm not going to go
into that it's way too complicated um
and Einstein and Rosen worked out that
such things could exist somebody else
coined the term wormhole for them but on
the left there you see a wormhole shown
in green but it's got this red doughnut
around it and that's essential Einstein
showed that you had to hold the throat
of the wormhole open by putting this red
doughnut of stuff around it
unfortunately the red doughnut needs to
be made of material that has negative
energy because it's trying to curve
space into that shape not the funnel
shape that you get if you have positive
energy bearing in mind that negative
energy means negative mass because e
equals MC squared so if one's negative
shows the other this means you need some
stuff to build the torus that weighs
less than nothing at all
and we don't know that that's impossible
but we've never seen any way by which
anything can have negative mass even
antimatter has positive mass it has
positive energy and positive mass
otherwise very simply if you took matter
and antimatter and one had positive mass
and the other negative you put them
together actually you'd be putting some
negative energy with some positive
energy and they would surely cancel out
and that's not what we see we see a
giant flash of energy so we know it must
be positive mass well the wormhole look
like we saw a picture of a black hole
taken with the world telescope there
what about this if we saw the event
horizon of what we thought was a black
hole but is said of a black hole in the
center we might see the image of a far
distant piece of the universe through it
this would be the best telescope in the
world and will be an absolutely
fantastic discovery and this is why it's
worth going and looking to see if we
could find such objects because they
would shortcut and give us a view of how
a distant part of the universe was or is
now as as compotes are looking at it as
it was bit earth if we were looking at
it normally get the right way around
alternatively if you don't want to build
a telescope drive if we can make a
wormhole we could surely make a warp
warp drive all we need is some of that
negative energy and now what we do is
Bend the space one way in front of us we
compress it in front of us and expand it
again the other way behind us and ride
and surf our way across the galaxy
sitting in a little bubble of flat
space-time in the middle but all of the
rest of space-time flows around us and
that would absolutely work is called an
Albuquerque warp drive and the equations
of einstein's relativity say that it's
possible so most of the physics of Star
Trek was all good you know you can even
build a time machine if you have a
wormhole you can travel to some other
place but you can also travel to some
other time by going through a wormhole
but what you can't do is go back to a
time earlier than when the wormhole was
created and that is interesting because
it explains why we're not overrun with
time tourists from the future I'm sure
they'd be very interested perhaps they'd
a voyage 2020 but some of the rest of
the history they might be coming back to
have a good look but they can't because
we haven't invented the first time
machine yet but you'll know when someone
does because suddenly there we time
tourists all over the place all coming
back to have a look now there's one more
chapter really here that's going to have
a look at and that's chapter 9 the arrow
of time and this really relates to
thermodynamics the cup of coffee that
I've got here was indeed hot at the
beginning of the talk and is now gone
cold what's left of it and that is
because of thermodynamics and heat
flowing from hot bodies to cold bodies
but it's also telling us that there is a
difference between the future and the
past it's a very great curiosity really
almost all of our equations are
completely symmetrical as regards time
they don't care whether you put time in
as going one way or negative time going
the other way into them you can work out
how things have arrived at a current
state and predict the future equally
well with them so they don't
discriminate yet you can remember the
past but you can't remember the future
so let's have a look at this and this is
a little bit mind-bending so we live
13.8 billion years from the Big Bang
measured in time units and there's a
great curiosity if we calculate the
radius of a black hole using that
Schwarzschild formula that I showed you
at the beginning of all of the mass
including all the dark matter that we
see around us and work out what radius
of a black hole of that mass should be
it comes out at 13.8 billion light years
this is a massive coincidence or
something highly significant and we
don't know which it's almost as if the
whole universe is actually inside a
black hole of this size and this mass
now in if we have a think about what's
going on inside the black hole I've
talked a lot about the fact we can't go
in there and if we do we can't come out
and tell anybody but our theories can
help penetrate it for us what we think
happens is that space-time gets so
curled up on itself by the curvature
imposed by the immense force of gravity
that it gets so twisted that all the
possible future paths for any particle
no matter which direction it tries to
move once it's inside the black hole
they all converge to this central point
the point that we call the singularity
at that point the curvature of
space-time becomes infinite and as a
result time essentially stops there is
no after there is no future time and
there is no beyond it's the end of
physics this really means that again the
media love to talk about people falling
through a black hole and coming out
somewhere else and if I'm right about
this then that won't happen that in fact
you will come to a sticky end at the
singularity and all of physics will
cease and your clock will stop ticking
and there will be no after for you so
there's no sense in which you can travel
through a black hole you can travel
through a wormhole but you can't travel
through a black hole but wait a minute
what we said about the Big Bang was bang
came from a singularity which was an
infinite curvature of space-time and we
said that time started
at the big bang and that there was no
before the big bang because well it's
where time starts likewise there's no
beyond it you can't go through the Big
Bang and out the other side it is the
beginning of physics and in fact if we
have a little think about this in the
universe we see all the possible paths
that have led us to where we are now all
no matter which direction we try to
travel in we look outwards in every
possible direction on every possible
line of sight we see the cosmic
microwave background radiation and
behind that the Big Bang itself is
lurking the universe was smaller and
smaller and smaller in the past and you
can imagine that no matter what
direction you were trying to head
eventually all those paths converge to
that singularity from which everything
came when the universe was zero size now
if you've been following along and your
head isn't hurting too much then you
will notice that this is the complete
reverse of what I said about the black
hole if we go the black hole it says all
the same things but time is running the
other way everything is going towards
the future singularity but for the Big
Bang the past all appears to have come
from the singularity
it is as if the world lines the paths of
all particles began at the Big Bang
singularity and then many of them
perhaps all of them may be eventually
end up inside the singularities of black
holes and so for such a particle time
flows from the past where there was one
singularity the black the Big Bang one
to one of many possible future
singularities if you swapped the
direction of time over then black holes
suddenly looked like sources from which
everything Springs and the Big Bang
looks like a black hole a sink into
which everything falls if you switch
your direction of time over
and that's very interesting because the
science says that that is what happens
to the time coordinates when you cross
the event horizon that when you cross
from outside to inside the time
coordinate reverses so just perhaps
telling us that the arrow of time points
one way from the order of one
singularity in the past at the Big Bang
to the chaos of many many singularities
in the future and maybe the universe
began when that highly ordered state of
the Big Bang and leads onwards to the
multitude of chaotic the organized
black holes some point that each
particle might end up falling into one
after some period of time and maybe that
is why though past is not the same as
the future because in the past there was
just one and in the future there are
potentially many possible outcomes for
each particle and we don't know where
its final destiny is going to be now
that's all quite speculative and very
mind-bending and actually one final
thing that Stephen said was that perhaps
black holes are baby universes and that
our universe is one of an infinite tree
of such things so you can imagine our
universe has spawned a whole lot of
little new baby universes and that
actually if you lived inside what we
think of as a black hole maybe it looks
like time is running the other way and
you might conclude that you had come
from the black hole singularity and
we're moving outwards away from it this
makes my head hurt I don't know about
yours and with that I'll bring this to
an end and enjoyed it
you